MiMC exponents (#6)
clearmatics/zeth-specifications: appendices/appendix06-mimc-security.tex

We observe that this claim aligns with~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99}. In fact if $\mimc{}$ is operated over $\FFx{2^n}$, it is easy to see that the degree of the cubic map can be expressed as $3 = 2^t + 1$, where $t = 1$, and where $n$ and $1$ are trivially coprime. This case is covered by~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99} which confirms that the cubic function $S(x) = x^3$ over $\FFx{2^n}$ is an APN/2-uniform mapping, as desired for differential and linear cryptanalysis resistance.

Likewise, in~\cite[Section 5.1]{albrecht2016mimc} the authors claim that, provided that the cubic map is a permutation over the prime field of interest, $\mimc{}$ can be used to operate over prime fields of odd characteristic. In this case too, $S(x) = x^3$ is an APN, provided $p \neq 3$ (as reported by~\cite[Theorem 3, item 3]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99}).

> In~\cite[Section 5.3]{albrecht2016mimc} the choice of the map degree is relaxed to be of the general form $2^t \pm 1$. Unfortunately, the authors showed that the case $\exponent{} = 2^t + 1$ is not as good as it initially seems in $\FFx{2^n}$, due to term cancellation in fields of characteristic 2 that renders the resulting polynomial sparse\footnote{Since the round function is a polynomial, the whole scheme can be seen as a polynomial which overall degree and ``sparsity'' depend on the underlying field characteristic, degree of the round function and number of rounds.}. More precisely the degree of the polynomial will be bounded by $3^r$, $r$ being the number of rounds, which does not constitute an improvement on the case of $\exponent{} = 3$. For this very reason, exponents of the form $2^t + 1, t > 1$, may not be of interest (sparse polynomial and more expensive arithmetic in the round function).

Author: `polynomial which overal degree` -> `polynomial with overall degree`?

```suggestion
In~\cite[Section 5.3]{albrecht2016mimc} the choice of the map degree is relaxed to be of the general form $2^t \pm 1$. Unfortunately, the authors showed that the case $\exponent{} = 2^t + 1$ is not as good as it initially seems in $\FFx{2^n}$, due to term cancellation in fields of characteristic 2 that renders the resulting polynomial sparse\footnote{Since the round function is a polynomial, the whole scheme can be seen as a polynomial with overall degree and ``sparsity'' that depends on the underlying field characteristic, degree of the round function and number of rounds.}. More precisely the degree of the polynomial will be bounded by $3^r$, $r$ being the number of rounds, which does not constitute an improvement on the case of $\exponent{} = 3$. For this very reason, exponents of the form $2^t + 1, t > 1$, may not be of interest (sparse polynomial and more expensive arithmetic in the round function).
```

The case $\exponent{} = 2^t - 1$ does not yield an APN over $\FFx{2^n}$ either (except in the case $t = 2$ which reduces to the case $2^{t'} + 1$ for $t' = 1$). Similar observations show that picking round function degrees of the form $2^t \pm 1$ in the context where $\mimc{}$ is defined over prime fields $\FFx{p}$, $p$ odd prime, does not yield APNs.

\medskip

Overall, when studying the resistance of $\mimc{}$ against statistical attacks, we are interested in the probability that an input difference ($d$) is mapped into an output difference ($D$). That is, we are studying the probability of the following event:
\[
    F(x + d) - F(x) = D
\]

> , where $F$ is a function that may either represent a single round, a set of rounds, or the full cipher.

Author: comma appears at the start of the line.

In fact, when considering security against algebraic attacks, we want (roughly speaking) the polynomial that defines the cipher to be of maximum degree and full (or at least, dense). That is we want the degree of the polynomial to be higher than $2^{\secpar}$. Since in $\mimc{}$ the S-box is defined as $S(x) = x^{\exponent{}}$, then after $\rounds$ rounds the degree of the polynomial describing the cipher is $\exponent{}^{\rounds}$. Hence, we need

\[
    \exponent{}^{\rounds} \geq 2^{\secpar}
\]
that is, we want
\[
    \rounds \geq \secpar \log_{\exponent}(2)
\]

\begin{remark}
    More rounds may be required as advised in~\cite{DBLP:conf/asiacrypt/Eichlseder0LORS20} to prevent some algebraic attacks that can be mounted when $\mimc{}$ is used over binary fields $\FFx{2^n}$.
\end{remark}

It is important to note that the security analysis related to algebraic attacks relies on the fact that the polynomial describing the cipher is dense/full. If this assumption is violated, a more granular security analysis needs to be carried out for the setting of interest.

\begin{notebox}

>     For \emph{small exponents and large prime fields} (e.g.~for $\secpar = 128$, $p = 2^{128}$ and $\exponent{} = 3$), we see that the lower bound on the number of rounds is (much) smaller in the context of statistical attacks than in the context of algebraic attacks. As such, we see that in such settings algebraic attacks are much more powerful than statistical attacks. Hence, when instanting $\mimc{}$ with an \emph{small} exponent of the form $2^t \pm 1$, it is crucial to make sure that, even if the resulting map is not an APN, the polynomial describing the cipher remains full/dense. Importantly, if the setting is changed (e.g.~to use exponents that are ``big'' w.r.t.~the field size) the security analysis proposed in~\cite{albrecht2016mimc} must be changed.

Author: ```suggestion
    For \emph{small exponents and large prime fields} (e.g.~for $\secpar = 128$, $p = 2^{128}$ and $\exponent{} = 3$), we see that the lower bound on the number of rounds is (much) smaller in the context of statistical attacks than in the context of algebraic attacks. As such, we see that in such settings algebraic attacks are much more powerful than statistical attacks. Hence, when instantiating $\mimc{}$ with a \emph{small} exponent of the form $2^t \pm 1$, it is crucial to make sure that, even if the resulting map is not an APN, the polynomial describing the cipher remains full/dense. Importantly, if the setting is changed (e.g.~to use exponents that are ``big'' w.r.t.~the field size) the security analysis proposed in~\cite{albrecht2016mimc} must be changed.
```
